Bill Menger – Retired:

Bill holds BS degrees in Electrical Engineering and Geophysics from Texas A&M University (1977). He was a nuclear engineer on US Navy Submarines for five years.  Bill then joined Conoco R&D working in magnetotellurics, multi-component seismic, and development of a seismic processing system for the Cray X-MP. He moved to Houston with Conoco's Advance Exploration group, building a worldwide database of all its oil and gas data using a distributed database. After a stint in Lafayette as data management supervisor, he left Conoco to join Applied Geophysical Software, where he wrote geophysical software for multiple suppression, model-building, tomography, and depth migration. Bill rejoined Conoco in 1998 and assisted with the rewrite of Conoco’s seismic processing system.  From the ConocoPhillips merger in 2002 until March 2009 he supervised a geophysical software and HPC group.  At ConocoPhillips, Bill was instrumental in obtaining open source licensing for CPS (the processing system) http://sourceforge.net/projects/cpseis and GeoCraft, a framework for general purpose geophysical software. Bill is co-founder, former board member, and past President of the Society of HPC Professionals.  After Conoco, Bill worked at Fusion Technology, Global Geophysical, and ION/GXT.  At the latter he was director of HPC, managing a team of thirteen and a budget of $20MM.  Bill left ION to form Houston HPC Services, and retired after three years of consulting.  Bill and his wife Patty are A2 square dancers, parents of three boys, and have seven grandchildren.

