# Standing on the Shoulders of the Guy in the UK Office
 
Justin Gosses
 
> Writing in progress....  &mdash; 
 
The phrase “If I have seen further, it is by standing on the shoulders of giants.” was written by Isaac Newton to Robert Hooke in reference to building upon the work his predecessors. In science, we often think of these giants as long dead men in history books. In computer science, many of the giants are still alive. In open-source, they are people you meet at conferences. In inner source, they are your co-workers writing code right now, including those you’ve never met. 
 
If there is a low hanging fruit of innovation, it might be inner source. While open-source has proved its value in terms of better code through more eyeballs and the ability to leverage mindshare to organize development of code ecosystems without centralized control, open-source is hard for companies and especially hard for oil and gas. Lawyers get involved. Release processes are slow, non-existent, or written for the worst-case scenario. Inner source offers many of the benefits with increased speed and less institutional pushback. It can also be a stepping stone to open-source.
 
Inner source refers to the sharing and reuse of code written in an organization by any other part of the organization. While oil and gas companies are adept at sharing within disciplines geographically distributed in multiple offices, up and down the organization hierarchy one layer at a time, or across disciplines operating in a local area, inner source needs to be code sharing across the entire company. Financial analysts and geoscientists both use Pandas, a Python library for data analysis. Petrophysicists and procurement analysts both use natural language processing to analyze large numbers of documents. Traditional boundaries in oil and gas aren't helpful when it comes to sharing code. The distinguishing characteristics are tools and techniques, not discipline, geography, data source, or upstream versus downstream. 
 
Although inner-source can be evaluated entirely through the lens of external contributions to  projects that are additional to the work of the main project team, this would be a mistake. The benefits of inner-source stem also include code reuse, exposure to different programming approaches, and cheaper faster programmer skill development through improved community. In a company that does inner-source well, code is more secure, because there are more eyeballs on each piece of code. Projects are written faster as more code can be reused. As the rate of code reuse and external contributions increase, external users have heightened expectations of good documentation and original developers have greater need for improved test coverage, resulting in more reliable code. Micro-services become increasingly preferred over monolithic architectures to take advantage of previously written code. APIs become a more standard requirement across databases and systems. Micro-services and APIs together slowly punch holes into data silos across the organization allowing data to flow more easily across system and organization boundaries. Many GUI-based software packages in oil and gas allow you to run Python or R inside them. As these small scripts are shared, more value is pulled from software tools already paid for. When more people writing code can find examples of similar code being written by others in different parts of the organization, opportunities for mentorship increase, development time decreases, and sparsely distributed  expert programming knowledge can more efficiently be distributed to where it is needed. 

An enterprise instance of github, gitlab, or bitbucket running behind the company firewall is a well established answer to where to start with inner-source. This only provides part of the answer, however. There are required changes in company culture and increased developer networking needs with less well established answers. If external contributions are to be integrated, mangers need to give developers time to both contribute to projects outside their main objectives and manage pull requests after the main development phase is complete. A company-wide chat tool that enables efficient topic-based communication can promote connections between people in different parts of the organization who may not know of each other but use the same code library. People also need tools to help them search through code reposititories and quickly find code and developers relevant to their needs. Some combination of natural language processing, graph databases, and machine-learning based recommendation engines may provide a solution, but there is no established answer yet. 
 
As more people know how to code and the amount of time needed to write code decreases, the amount of code written will increase, the location of people writing code in the organization will radically diversify, and the need for effectives means to share, contribute, and manage code across large organizations will become more pressing. All large oil and gas companies will eventually have an inner-source program. Some will have one earlier. Some will have a better one.

 
