# Standing on the Shoulders of the Guy in the UK Office
 
Justin Gosses
 
> “If I have seen further, it is by standing on the shoulders of giants.” ~ Isaac Newton.

Issac Newton wrote this to Robert Hooke, a British scientist, describing how his work built on the work of his predecessors. In science, we often think of these giants as old, dead, men in history books. In computer science, many of the giants of the field are still alive. In open-source, they are people you meet at conferences. In innersource, they are your coworkers who write code, including those you’ve never met.


Innersource refers to the sharing, reuse, and distributed development of code inside an organization. While open-source has proved its value in terms of better code through more eyeballs and leveraging mindshare to organize development of code without centralized control, open-source is hard for companies and especially hard for oil and gas. Lawyers get involved. Release processes are slow, non-existent, or written for the worst-case scenario. Innersource offers many of the benefits with less institutional pushback. It can also be a stepping stone to open-source.

 
Oil and gas companies are adept at information sharing within disciplines geographically distributed in multiple offices, one level up and down the organization hierarchy, and among disciplines operating in a local area. However, innersource needs code sharing across the entire company, not just within the normal communication silos. Financial analysts and geoscientists both use Pandas, a Python library for data analysis. Petrophysicists and procurement analysts both use natural language processing to find patterns in corpuses of text documents too large to read one at a time. Traditional boundaries in oil and gas aren't helpful when it comes to sharing code. The distinguishing characteristics for useful groupings are tools and techniques, not discipline, geography, or upstream versus downstream.
 
Although innersource can be evaluated entirely through the lens of contributions to projects that augment the work of the team that originated the code, this would be a mistake. In a company that does innersource well, code is more secure, because there are more people reading it. Projects are written faster, because more code can be reused. As the rate of code reuse and external contributions increase, code users have heightened expectations for good documentation, and the original developers have a greater need for better test coverage. This results in more reliable and maintainable code. 

Microservices are becoming increasingly preferred over monolithic architectures, partly to take advantage of previously written code. Microservices and APIs together can punch holes in data silos, allowing data to flow more easily across the boundaries of software and people systems. GUI-based software tools that are already paid for can be leveraged to provide even more value when small scripts that can agument their capabilities are shared widely. When more people can find examples of similar code being written by others, opportunities for mentorship increase, development time decreases, and sparsely distributed expert knowledge can more efficiently be distributed to where it is needed.
 
A centralized enterprise instance of Github, Gitlab, or Bitbucket running behind the company firewall is the well-established answer to how to start innersourcing of code. However, to be effective, an organization also needs to be willing to shift company culture and communication methods. Managers need to give developers permission to contribute to projects outside of their main objectives, and time to manage pull requests after the main development phase is done. In a large organization, finding similar code projects and similar developers can be a challenge in itself. A company-wide chat tool that enables topic-based communication in addition to direct person-to-person communication is needed to connect people who will have never met. There may also be a need for recommendation engines that use enterprise code repositories to connect people and products, but there are not well established solutions for this yet.
 
There are a lot more young people who know how to program today, and many mid-career people learning how to code, partly as a result of increasing interest in data science. As more people gain coding skills, and the time needed to write code decreases, the amount of code written will increase, the location of people writing code in the organization will radically diversify, and the need for effective means to share and manage code across large organizations will become more pressing. All oil and gas companies will eventually have an innersource program. The companies that implement a good innersource program soon will be at an advantage. When you can stand on the shoulders of the guy in the UK office, and he can stand on your shoulders, the rate at which your organization can innovate, or simply get things done, increases quite significantly.
