THE POWER OF SIMPLICITY.  --   I HATE COMPUTERS
COMPUTER ISN’T MY FRIEND ANYMORE
BITTER SWEET COMPLEXITY II

Alberto Rusic

Thinking about it now, twenty five years ago the transition to a mouse and keyboard from punched cards was a spectacular change for me. As more complex problems could be explained to a computer, I started to ruminate the idea of developing a Rock Physics aid system, so to speak. 

I didn’t have much time to devote to the programming side since I still had to work on projects, so my intention was to develop short modules and link them later with some smart master manager. I though in the beginning, geophysical rock physics field would be relatively easy to implement because a lot of the knowledge contained in the field is expressed in algebraic formulas, but the project turned out to be more complex than I initially expected. 

To me, rock physics would refer to any physical phenomena that involves a rock, i.e., electromagnetics, nuclear, mechanical, etc. In the context of the aid system I wanted to develop, I think of rock physics just the subset of knowledge that relates seismic amplitudes to geological aspects of the rock such as the mineral composition, amount of porosity or storage capacity of the rock, fluid content and other variables like temperature and pressure. This is a rather simplified idea of what geophysical rock physics is but it is simple enough to encourage anybody to develop a system around it.

Now, what is involved in the development of such a system?, it’s not just the knowledge we have about a subject matter, but how this knowledge may be interlinked and how the bits and pieces of knowledge interact with each other. We also have to deal with the complexity of knowledge evolution, an idea about a subject may change with time (Einstein tried to force his theory in the beginning to his believes) or more knowledge may be discovered with time. The system should be able to help us handle that. 

One example of this is the seismic amplitude. As seismic data was recorded geophysicist in the beginning just followed the events to define the structure of the reservoir. At this point we can develop a system to help us delineate subsurface structure. Later, geophysicist realized the amplitude of the seismic events may change and that those changes could be related to lithology and fluid properties present in the subsurface. Obviously we would like a system that incorporates this knowledge and help us not only to delineate structure but also to reveal whether what is in the subsurface is a reservoir of interest or not. As we want to add more knowledge to an existing system, more resources are needed to develop a really helpful computer program. 

Furthermore, is not only the knowledge to do something that is solely involved, it is also the way we deal with all the results produced from that knowledge. For example, the AVO response of an interface can be simple program that implements the Zoeppritz equations, but what about changing the values of the elastic properties of the two touching media, what if we have to do thousands of trials and have to store the results and compare them?, what if we want to query the results?. What if we want this results to be used by another piece of knowledge stored somewhere in a computer memory waiting for some input?. This is not an easy answer and I think at this point the current computer architecture starts to backfire and the system works against us instead of helping us.

As far as the personal system in development is concerned, at the moment is a bunch of modules, each one being able to solve or perform a task, but they are not related to each other, they don’t talk to each other, management has to be done manually and as more modules are developed, more difficult it is to integrate all of it into a whole intelligent system.

This may be a sad story so far but this story hasn’t ended yet, as we have room to improve we are going to do so and I’m pretty sure someday we’ll build something that will outsmart us. We have already done that with DEEP BLUE, defeating Gary Kasparov, world chess champion at the time and we’ll do it again.

I strongly believe a better interaction and better computers are possible and necessary if we would like to solve real complex problems we are facing today in shorter time, we need another leap forward, equivalent to the on we had from punching cards to mouse and keyboards. It occurs to me a good measure of a good software could be accounted by considering the number of mouse clicks and keyboard strokes you need to finish a task in our current systems, someday I am going to count them, maybe next project, yes,  but now I need to go back to my project, need to finish it, click, click, click, click, click, tack, tack, tack, tack, tack, tack, click, click, click…….. 
