THE POWER OF SIMPLICITY. I HATE COMPUTERS
COMPUTER ISN’T MY FRIEND ANYMORE
BITTER SWEET COMPLEXITY 

Alberto Rusic

It amazes me what computers can do nowadays and yet, I believe we are just seeing the tip of the iceberg. I can envision complex systems being managed or simulated by computers like, governments (a computer may be elected president in some distant future), the earth atmosphere, leading to extremely accurate weather prediction and to completely solve this challenge will provide helpful insight on weather in other planets, as we get ready for space colonization. It may be possible the numerical solution of geological dynamics with immediate application to benefit humanity by being able to predict earthquakes with high time accuracy, even we can think about the possibility of solving the Schrodinger equation numerically may lead us to delve deeper into the secrets of life. In my head the possibilities are endless, but no matter how powerful these machines are, it shocks me how hard it is to interact with them, to make them do the things we want them to do, to program them.

It all started back in my college days, maybe a bit before that. In those days I had to take computer programming class as a regular topic. I was told that the class was Hell but it didn’t bothered me since I was very curious about it and I could see the power it brings to know how to program computers. I thought, well it’s only three projects we have to do and they have to be done in three months, probably it’s not going to be that bad, plus I’m smart. I was wrong, it was hell. 

Of course the language of choice at the time, for scientific computing was Fortran, and I had to painstakingly punch every line of code in a separate card, input the program into the computer by means of a card reader (a machine similar to that used today to count bills in banks) and wait for the results, which was a stack of paper that served as a scrolling screen. I had to read through all the printed lines to get the errors if any, punch new cards and repeat the process all over again. A simple program (about 200 lines of code) took at least one week to be developed, to make it work without errors. 

The next semester the University received brand new IBM PCs, quite an event at that time. It was amazing, the new way to interact with the computer, a mouse, keyboard and a screen. This was a big leap forward from the punched cards we were using just one semester ago. It was a spectacular novelty at least for me and it made a big difference. I loved the fact that such changes improved the time of building a computer program, from one week to maybe a couple of hours, (Remember, 200 lines of code we are talking about here). I realized more complex problems may be solved in a fraction of the time and in this case it was mainly due to a change on how we interacted with computers, the way we tell them how to do the things we want them to do and the way we got feedback from them. 

As more complex problems could be solved, I engaged in a diversity of topics mainly related to the oil industry. I preferred those where a real physical phenomena could be solved by any of the available numerical methods. Soon I was applying these methods to any partial differential equation that I got in my hands. Gradually I engaged in more complicated problems like fluid flow, electromagnetic phenomena, and fluid flow through porous media. 

I tried many other different things and I felt in love with what at the time the visualization possibilities were. For example, sophisticated Photo-realistic and Non-Photo realistic rendering algorithms were being developed at that moment. I started to use POVRAY and then got in touch with Renderman, the engine used by Pixar to produce their amazing animated movies, the world of splines and raytracing was wonderful. I realized that the visualization of results was an important part of knowledge communication, and finding of a good visualization or graphing libraries became essential. By good I mean fast results, able to produce a high quality graphs with the least code. This search ended with what I call the “programmers holy trinity”, python, matplotlib and VTK (the visualization toolkit). This combination proved to be very powerful when I did my masters degree on fluid flow through porous media. 

At this point I was completely hooked and I was starving for more, much more.
